Split Surjectivity (#499)
the1lab/1lab: src/1Lab/Function/Surjection.lagda.md

is-equiv→is-surjective eqv x = inc (eqv .is-eqv x .centre)
```

Surjections also are closed under a weaker form of [[two-out-of-three]]:

> if $f circ g$ is surjective, then $f$ must also be surjective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if $f \circ g$ is surjective, then $f$ must also be surjective.
```

  injective-surjective→is-equiv (hlevel 2)
```
-->

## Surjectivity and images

A map $f : A \to B$ if and only if the inclusion of the image of $f$ into $B$
is an [[equivalence]].

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv
  : ∀ {f : A → B}
  → is-surjective f ≃ is-equiv {A = image f} fst
```

The forward direction is almost immediate: surjectivity of $f$ means
that $B$ includes into its image, so it must be an equivalence. For the
reverse direction, suppose that the inclusion of the image of $f$ is an
equivalence. This lets us find some point in the image of $f$ for every $b : B$.
Moreover, this point in the image must lie in a fibre of $b$, as the inclusion is
an equivalence.

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv {f = f} = prop-ext! to from where

>   to : is-surjective f → is-equiv fst
>   to f-surj =
>     is-iso→is-equiv $
>       iso (λ b → b , f-surj b)
>         (λ _ → refl)
>         (λ _ → Σ-prop-path! refl)

Reviewer 2: prefer:
```suggestion
  to : is-surjective f → is-equiv fst
  to f-surj = is-iso→is-equiv $ iso 
    (λ b → b , f-surj b)
    (λ _ → refl)
    (λ _ → Σ-prop-path! refl)
```

  from : is-equiv fst → is-surjective f
  from im-eqv b = subst (λ b → ∥ fibre f b ∥) (equiv→counit im-eqv b) (snd (equiv→inverse im-eqv b))
```

# Split surjective functions

:::{.definition #surjective-splitting}
A **surjective splitting** of a function $f : A \to B$ consists of a designated
element of the fibre $f^*b$ for each $b : B$.
:::

```agda
surjective-splitting : (A → B) → Type _
surjective-splitting f = ∀ b → fibre f b
```

Note that unlike "being surjective", a surjective splitting of $f$ is a *structure*
on $f$, not a property. This difference becomes particularly striking when we
look at functions into [[contractible]] types: if $B$ is contractible,
then the type of surjective splittings of a function $f : A \to B$ is equivalent to $A$.

```agda

> cod-contr→surjective-splitting≃dom

Reviewer 2: this name is a nightmare (i don't have anything better to offer at the moment).

Author: Every day I stray closer to the light of `Lemma 1.2.4.12`

Author: This is intended as an illustration of why split subjectivity is structure, so we could make it anonymous.

  injective-surjective→is-equiv (hlevel 2)
```
-->

## Surjectivity and images

> A map $f : A \to B$ if and only if the inclusion of the image of $f$ into $B$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A map $f : A \to B$ is surjective if and only if the inclusion of the image of $f$ into $B$
```

is an [[equivalence]].

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv
  : ∀ {f : A → B}

>   → is-surjective f ≃ is-equiv {A = image f} fst

Reviewer: I think it would be more illuminating to prove this by a chain of equivalences: `fst` being an equivalence is the same as its fibres being contractible; the fibres of `fst` are of the form `∥ fibre f x ∥` (by `Fibre-equiv`), and `∥ A ∥` is contractible iff inhabited.

EDIT: just saw your [comment](https://github.com/the1lab/1lab/blob/6989eca0b8ef81fb0127fe8b97782ea14b0b159d/src/Data/Set/Projective.lagda.md#L48-L51) but I'm not sure why it's there instead of here 😅

Author: Yeah, this is much nicer.

```

The forward direction is almost immediate: surjectivity of $f$ means
that $B$ includes into its image, so it must be an equivalence. For the
reverse direction, suppose that the inclusion of the image of $f$ is an
equivalence. This lets us find some point in the image of $f$ for every $b : B$.
Moreover, this point in the image must lie in a fibre of $b$, as the inclusion is
an equivalence.

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv {f = f} = prop-ext! to from where

  to : is-surjective f → is-equiv fst
  to f-surj = is-iso→is-equiv $ iso
     (λ b → b , f-surj b)
     (λ _ → refl)
     (λ _ → Σ-prop-path! refl)

  from : is-equiv fst → is-surjective f
  from im-eqv b =
    subst (λ b → ∥ fibre f b ∥)
      (equiv→counit im-eqv b)
      (equiv→inverse im-eqv b .snd)
```

# Split surjective functions

:::{.definition #surjective-splitting}
A **surjective splitting** of a function $f : A \to B$ consists of a designated

> element of the fibre $f^*b$ for each $b : B$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
element of the fibre $f^{-1}(b)$ for each $b : B$.
```

for consistency

Reviewer 2: I think we use `^*` in more places? So I'd change the `f\inv` personally

Author: Yeah, I've always been iffy on `f^{-1}(x)` for the type of fibres. Looks like we use both in this file though.

Reviewer: Either way is fine

```agda
cod-contr→is-surjective-iff-dom-inhab
  : (f : A → B)
  → is-contr B
  → is-surjective f ≃ ∥ A ∥
cod-contr→is-surjective-iff-dom-inhab {A = A} f B-contr =
  (∀ b → ∥ fibre f b ∥) ≃⟨ unique-choice B-contr ⟩
  ∥ (∀ b → fibre f b) ∥ ≃⟨ ∥-∥-ap (cod-contr→surjective-splitting≃dom f B-contr) ⟩
  ∥ A ∥                 ≃∎
```

In light of this, we provide the following definition.

:::{.definition #split-surjective}
A function $f : A \to B$ is **split surjective** if there merely exists a
surjective splitting of $f$.
:::

```agda
is-split-surjective : (A → B) → Type _
is-split-surjective f = ∥ surjective-splitting f ∥
```

Every split surjective map is surjective.

```agda
is-split-surjective→is-surjective : is-split-surjective f → is-surjective f
is-split-surjective→is-surjective f-split-surj b = do
  f-splitting ← f-split-surj
  pure (f-splitting b)
```

Note that we do not have a converse to this constructively: the statement that
every surjective function between [[sets]] splits is [[equivalent to the axiom of choice|axiom-of-choice]]!

## Split surjective functions and sections

The type of surjective splittings of a function $f : A \to B$ is equivalent

> to the type of sections of $f$, EG: functions $s : B \to A$ with $f \circ s = \id$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the type of sections of $f$, i.e. functions $s : B \to A$ with $f \circ s = \id$.
```

or viz.

  (Σ[ s ∈ (B → A) ] ((x : B) → f (s x) ≡ x)) ≃˘⟨ Σ-Π-distrib ⟩
  ((b : B) → Σ[ a ∈ A ] f a ≡ b)             ≃⟨⟩
  surjective-splitting f                     ≃∎
```

This means that a function $f$ is split surjective if and only if there
[[merely]] exists some section of $f$.

```agda
exists-section-iff-split-surjective
  : (f : A → B)
  → (∃[ s ∈ (B → A) ] is-right-inverse s f) ≃ is-split-surjective f
exists-section-iff-split-surjective f =
  ∥-∥-ap (section≃surjective-splitting f)
```

## Closure properties of split surjective functions

Like their non-split counterparts, split surjective functions are closed under composition.

```agda
∘-surjective-splitting
  : surjective-splitting f
  → surjective-splitting g
  → surjective-splitting (f ∘ g)

∘-is-split-surjective
  : is-split-surjective f
  → is-split-surjective g
  → is-split-surjective (f ∘ g)
```

<details>
<summary> The proof is essentially identical to the non-split case.
</summary>
```agda
∘-surjective-splitting {f = f} f-split g-split c =
  let (f*c , p) = f-split c
      (g*f*c , q) = g-split f*c
  in g*f*c , ap f q ∙ p

∘-is-split-surjective fs gs = ⦇ ∘-surjective-splitting fs gs ⦈

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```agda
surjective-splitting-cancelr {g = g} fg-split c =
  let (fg*c , p) = fg-split c
  in g fg*c , p

is-split-surjective-cancelr fg-split =
  map surjective-splitting-cancelr fg-split
```
</details>

A function is an equivalence if and only if it is a split-surjective
[[embedding]].

```agda
embedding-split-surjective≃is-equiv
  : {f : A → B}
  → (is-embedding f × is-split-surjective f) ≃ is-equiv f
embedding-split-surjective≃is-equiv {f = f} =
  prop-ext!
    (λ (f-emb , f-split-surj) →
      embedding-surjective→is-equiv
        f-emb
        (is-split-surjective→is-surjective f-split-surj))
    (λ f-equiv → is-equiv→is-embedding f-equiv , is-equiv→is-split-surjective f-equiv)
```

# Surjectivity and connectedness

If $f : A \to B$ is a function out of a [[contractible]] type $A$,
then $f$ is surjective if and only if $B$ is a [[pointed connected type]], where
the basepoint of $B$ is given by $f$ applied to the centre of contraction of $A$.

```agda
contr-dom-surjective-iff-connected-cod
  : ∀ {f : A → B}
  → (A-contr : is-contr A)
  → is-surjective f ≃ ((x : B) → ∥ x ≡ f (A-contr .centre) ∥)
```

To see this, note that the type of fibres of $f$ over $x$ is equivalent

> to the type of paths $x = f(a_{bullet})$, where $a_{\bullet}$ is the centre

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the type of paths $x = f(a_{\bullet})$, where $a_{\bullet}$ is the centre
```

of contraction of $A$.

```agda
contr-dom-surjective-iff-connected-cod {A = A} {B = B} {f = f} A-contr =
  Π-cod≃ (λ b → ∥-∥-ap (Σ-contr-eqv A-contr ∙e sym-equiv))
```

This correspondence is not a coincidence: surjective maps are a special case

> of a more general family of maps called [[connected maps]].

Reviewer: Wait, what's the maths here? Being a connected map is about the *fibres* being connected, and you recover connected spaces by taking maps A → 1, but here we're looking at maps 1 → B.

Reviewer: OK, there are two facts here that we may be mixing up:

- surjective maps are precisely (-1)-connected maps, i.e. maps whose fibres are (-1)-connected (i.e. merely inhabited)
- maps 1 → A are surjective precisely when A is 0-connected

I think I'd remove the paragraph altogether to avoid confusion.

Author: Surjective maps are (-1)-connected maps, so this is a special case of `is-n-connected-point`. I'll add a link to clarify.

  injective-surjective→is-equiv (hlevel 2)
```
-->

## Surjectivity and images

A map $f : A \to B$ is surjective if and only if the inclusion of the
image of $f$ into $B$ is an [[equivalence]].

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv
  : ∀ {f : A → B}
  → is-surjective f ≃ is-equiv {A = image f} fst
```

> First, note that asking for the [[mere]] existence of a fibre of $f$
> is equivalent to asking that the the type of mere fibres be [[contractible]],
> as the type of mere fibres is a [[proposition]]. Moreover, the type
> of mere fibres of $f$ is equivalent to the fibres of the inclusion of
> the image of $f$. This means that we have a choice of mere fibres
> of $f^*(b)$ for every $b$ exactly when the fibres of the image inclusion
> are contractible, i.e. the image inclusion is an equivalence.

Reviewer: Sorry I rewrote the whole thing. I think it reads better backwards, and I don't like using "fibre" to refer to the *elements* of the fibres.

```suggestion
First, note that the fibre of the inclusion of the image of $f$ at $b$
is the [[propositional truncation]] of the fibre of $f$ at $b$, by
construction. Asking for this inclusion to be an equivalence is the same as
asking for those fibres to be [[contractible]], which thus amounts to
asking for the fibres of $f$ to be [[merely]] inhabited, which is the
definition of $f$ being surjective.
```

Author: The code seems to agree: all of those equivalences are flipped :P

```agda
surjective-iff-image-equiv {A = A} {B = B} {f = f} =
  (∀ b → ∃[ a ∈ A ] (f a ≡ b))            ≃˘⟨ Π-cod≃ (λ b → is-prop→is-contr-iff-inhabited (hlevel 1)) ⟩
  (∀ b → is-contr (∃[ a ∈ A ] (f a ≡ b))) ≃˘⟨ Π-cod≃ (λ b → is-hlevel-ap 0 (Fibre-equiv _ _)) ⟩
  (∀ b → is-contr (fibre fst b))          ≃˘⟨ is-equiv≃fibre-is-contr ⟩
  is-equiv fst                            ≃∎
```

# Split surjective functions

:::{.definition #surjective-splitting}
A **surjective splitting** of a function $f : A \to B$ consists of a designated
element of the fibre $f^*b$ for each $b : B$.
:::

```agda
surjective-splitting : (A → B) → Type _
surjective-splitting f = ∀ b → fibre f b
```

Note that unlike "being surjective", a surjective splitting of $f$ is a *structure*
on $f$, not a property. This difference becomes particularly striking when we
look at functions into [[contractible]] types: if $B$ is contractible,
then the type of surjective splittings of a function $f : A \to B$ is equivalent to $A$.

```agda
cod-contr→surjective-splitting≃dom
  : (f : A → B)
  → is-contr B
  → surjective-splitting f ≃ A
```

> First, recall that functions out of contractible types are equivalences, so

Reviewer: That doesn't sound true.

Author: Bluh, meant to write "are equivalent to elements" but this got mangled in an edit

> a choice of fibres $(b : B) \to f^*(b)$ is equivalent to a single fibre
> at the centre of contraction of $B$. Moreover, the type of paths in $B$ is
> also contractible, so the type of fibres of $f : A \to B$ is equivalent to $A$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a dependent function $(b : B) \to f^*(b)$ is equivalent to an element of the fibre of $f$
at the centre of contraction of $B$. Moreover, the type of paths in $B$ is
also contractible, so that fibre is equivalent to $A$.
```

  : (f : A → B)
  → (∃[ s ∈ (B → A) ] is-right-inverse s f) ≃ is-split-surjective f
exists-section-iff-split-surjective f =
  ∥-∥-ap (section≃surjective-splitting f)
```

## Closure properties of split surjective functions

Like their non-split counterparts, split surjective functions are closed under composition.

```agda
∘-surjective-splitting
  : surjective-splitting f
  → surjective-splitting g
  → surjective-splitting (f ∘ g)

∘-is-split-surjective
  : is-split-surjective f
  → is-split-surjective g
  → is-split-surjective (f ∘ g)
```

<details>
<summary> The proof is essentially identical to the non-split case.
</summary>
```agda
∘-surjective-splitting {f = f} f-split g-split c =
  let (f*c , p) = f-split c
      (g*f*c , q) = g-split f*c
  in g*f*c , ap f q ∙ p

∘-is-split-surjective fs gs = ⦇ ∘-surjective-splitting fs gs ⦈
```
</details>

Every equivalence can be equipped with a surjective splitting, and
is thus split surjective.

```agda
is-equiv→surjective-splitting
  : is-equiv f
  → surjective-splitting f

is-equiv→is-split-surjective
  : is-equiv f
  → is-split-surjective f
```

This follows immediately from the definition of equivalences: if the

> type of fibres is contractible, then we can pluck the fibre we need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fibre is contractible, then we can pluck the element we need
```

</summary>
```agda
surjective-splitting-cancelr {g = g} fg-split c =
  let (fg*c , p) = fg-split c
  in g fg*c , p

is-split-surjective-cancelr fg-split =
  map surjective-splitting-cancelr fg-split
```
</details>

A function is an equivalence if and only if it is a split-surjective
[[embedding]].

```agda
embedding-split-surjective≃is-equiv
  : {f : A → B}
  → (is-embedding f × is-split-surjective f) ≃ is-equiv f
embedding-split-surjective≃is-equiv {f = f} =
  prop-ext!
    (λ (f-emb , f-split-surj) →
      embedding-surjective→is-equiv
        f-emb
        (is-split-surjective→is-surjective f-split-surj))
    (λ f-equiv → is-equiv→is-embedding f-equiv , is-equiv→is-split-surjective f-equiv)
```

# Surjectivity and connectedness

If $f : A \to B$ is a function out of a [[contractible]] type $A$,
then $f$ is surjective if and only if $B$ is a [[pointed connected type]], where
the basepoint of $B$ is given by $f$ applied to the centre of contraction of $A$.

```agda
contr-dom-surjective-iff-connected-cod
  : ∀ {f : A → B}
  → (A-contr : is-contr A)
  → is-surjective f ≃ ((x : B) → ∥ x ≡ f (A-contr .centre) ∥)
```

> To see this, note that the type of fibres of $f$ over $x$ is equivalent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see this, note that the fibre of $f$ over $x$ is equivalent
```
